---
title: "The Impact of AI on Academic Education"
slug: "impact"
summary: "Exploring how AI is changing higher education and required teaching skills."
---

<div class="row">
<div class="col-lg-10 mx-auto">

# The Impact of AI on Academic Education

## AI as Game-changer

The public release of ChatGPT-3.5 at the end of 2022 sparked enormous
interest in AI. Within a very short time, the potential applications of
AI in academic education, its opportunities, and its risks became
central topics in everyday discussions about academic teaching,
learning, and research.

Of course, universities have been integrating digital tools into
teaching and learning for decades. Just consider the rise and continuous
adoption of e-learning since the late 1990s.

However, AI is fundamentally different. The rapid proliferation of AI
applications since 2023 has highlighted an unprecedented intertwining of
education and technology, profoundly affecting teaching, research, and
academic integrity. In response, universities started to invest
significant resources to adapt to these developments and to adopt AI in
teaching, learning, and research, e.g. by publishing institutional
policies on how to embrace AI (cf. MacDonald 2025, Lee et al. 2024).

Many questions and uncertainties about the benefits and risks of AI have
been prompted: How should teaching and assessment practices evolve? To
what extent are traditional educational models being disrupted -
potentially for the better? How can teachers use AI to enhance teaching
and learning? How can we ensure the responsible and ethical use of AI?

The possibilities for integrating AI into teaching are extensive, as
detailed for generative AI in [Chapter 'Designing
courses'](/resources/training-materials-for-teachers/designing-courses/) of these guidelines.

Regardless of this, one thing is beyond doubt: ignoring AI in teaching
and learning in higher education is not an option. Teachers must embrace
its potential to enrich, integrate, or fully transform learning
environments to ensure that AI's game-changing opportunities align with
pedagogical values and meet the evolving needs of students, and society.

## Rethinking Courses

Using AI for teaching & learning requires addressing three fundamental
pedagogical questions:

- How do learning outcomes need to be reformulated?

- How must teaching materials, learning exercises, and assignments be adapted, developed further, or enhanced?

- Which methods and criteria are to be applied to assess the work and
    examinations that students complete with AI?

These questions are directly connected with fundamental issues of
academic education which inevitably arise when AI is used. The most
important issues include

- the use of AI by the principles of academic integrity,

- the legally compliant use of AI,

- and the ethically responsible use of AI.

While the core principles of academic integrity, legal compliance, and
ethical integrity are the same across disciplines, the practical
implementation of teaching methods varies considerably between academic
faculties and disciplines.

## Advancing Teaching Skills

Teachers need AI literacy and skills to support students in developing
AI literacy and skills. Within the wide scope of AI, certain skills are
essential, such as prompting, using AI in a legally compliant and
responsible manner, generating teaching materials or assessments with
AI, and critically evaluating AI outputs (cf. Lee 2023). Thus, teachers
are encouraged to maintain and expand their roles and skills as
architects of meaningful learning environments by embracing professional
development in the age of AI (see Chiu 2024). This will enable them to
design pedagogically, legally, and ethically sound scenarios in which AI
serves as a teaching and learning tool.

### Check your areas of AI expertise

For teachers, adopting AI means acquiring skills at four levels:

-   The ability to **use specific AI tools**, general and
    subject-specific, as standard elements of a professional teaching
    skills portfolio (technical AI skills).

-   The ability to **guide and advise students** in the professional,
    legally compliant and ethically responsible use of AI tools and in
    critically evaluating outputs (AI teaching skills).

-   The ability to **use, customize, or develop AI tools** like chatbots
    for teaching and learning (AI development skills).

-   The ability to **develop and apply methods for assessing** students'
    progress, works, and examinations accomplished with AI (AI-related
    assessment skills).

Building one's own digital and AI literacy, such as identifying AI\'s
potential and limitations, and devising strategies for its integration
into teaching practices, is imperative to leverage it. To this end, the
AI-HED project has developed workshops and interactive [AI-HED Training
Materials for
Teachers.](https://ai-hed.eu/resources/training-materials-for-teachers/)

### Enhance your prompting skills

Prompting is the primary method of communicating with generative AI
tools. A prompt is an instruction or input provided to an AI system to
elicit a specific response. Producing high-quality outputs often
requires a structured, step-by-step approach. The practice of giving
systematic instructions to generative AI is known as 'prompt
engineering', which involves specialized techniques and methods to
develop and optimize prompts effectively.

Prompting and prompt engineering are essential components of teaching
skills in two ways:

- First, they are necessary for creating course materials, assignments, exams, and other teaching-related content using AI.

- Second, teachers must be able to guide students in using prompts effectively. This entails understanding the types, techniques, and quality criteria of prompts and prompting.

AI companies usually provide valuable prompting and prompt engineering
guides (e.g. Anthropic 2023, OpenAI 2023) with explanations of key
terms, techniques, practical examples, and more.

For teachers seeking an easy introduction to prompting, a growing number
of universities and educational institutions offer useful resources and
examples, such as:

- Introduction to basic concepts of AI, elementary guidelines, and quickstart resources (metalab at Harvard 2025)

- Prompt libraries featuring examples from academic teaching across a wide range of subjects (e.g., Maastricht University 2024, Wharton University n.y.)

- Prompt labs for generative AI in university teaching (e.g. AI Campus 2024, available in German)

- Prompts and example outputs for various tasks, including developing research questions, writing code, and creating assessments (e.g. University of Edinburgh 2024)

### Stay up to date with the latest developments in AI -- in academic teaching and the workplace

Some applications of AI are well established, while many others are
still emerging. As AI is adopted in more and more areas of professional,
public, and private life, teachers must stay informed about new tools
and concepts. Teachers should also explore ways to integrate AI with
other learning technologies and leverage innovative applications in
their courses.

Staying up to date requires understanding how AI is being utilized in
the occupational fields where students are expected to work. To this
end, universities have adopted particular strategies, e.g. carrying out
analyses of AI-related qualification requirements and providing this
information to teachers and academic experts, for purposes of program
and course development.

Irrespective of this, there are various easy ways to keep up to date for
teachers:

-   seek advice from experts from the relevant professional field

-   analyse which specific AI skills are cited in typical job
    announcements

-   take a look at the [AI-HED AI Tools
    Heatmap](https://ai-hed.eu/resources/ai-tools-heatmap/).

Ultimately, there is one simple recommendation for educators considering
AI adoption: Dive in!

## Types of AI

The term 'generative AI' is arguably the most well-known type of AI, yet
it is often mistakenly equated with artificial intelligence as a whole.
In academic education, a wide range of AI systems and tools are relevant
that not primarily aim at producing new content like generative AI but
focus on identifying patterns in data to make predictions or decisions.
Here is a selection of types that are used in academic education for
different purposes.

**Generative AI** uses frameworks and models to produce new content,
such as text, images, sound, or code. To this end, generative AI uses
models like large language models (LLM) to learn patterns, structures,
and relationships within the data, which are then used to generate new
content. Teachers use generative AI to develop teaching and assessment
materials such as presentations, rubrics, educational videos,
assignments, and tests.

**Predictive AI** uses algorithms and architectures to forecast future
outcomes by analysing historical trends and correlations. Predictive AI
rapidly gains importance in various disciplines, e.g. for business
analytics, forecasting disease progression in health care, or protein
structure prediction in biology. In higher education, prediction of
student retention is a typical field of application of predictive AI.

**Assistive AI** focuses on models and frameworks designed to support
human decision-making or tasks without necessarily generating new
content. In higher education, assistive AI is applied to various
functions, including research paper analysis, text corrections and
improvements, grading assistance, administrative task automation, and
enhancing accessibility for students with disabilities.

**Adaptive AI** adjusts algorithms and models dynamically, learning from
new data or environmental changes to improve performance. In higher
education, adaptive AI can personalize learning paths by analysing
student performance and dynamically tailoring content to individual
needs.

**Simulative AI** employs models and computational architectures to
create virtual environments or scenarios that mimic real-world processes
for training, testing, or experimentation. In higher education and
research, it is used for virtual labs, research simulations, engineering
design testing, and modeling of climate models or molecular
interactions.

</div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-4">
  <div class="col-lg-10 mx-auto">
    <div class="d-flex justify-content-between">
      <div>
        <a href="/resources/training-materials-for-teachers/objectives/" class="btn btn-outline-primary">&laquo; Previous: Objectives</a>
      </div>
      <div>
        <a href="/resources/training-materials-for-teachers/pedagogical-approaches/" class="btn btn-primary">Next: Pedagogical Approaches &raquo;</a>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
