---
title: "5. Legal Compliance and Ethical Responsibility"
subtitle: Ensuring responsible and compliant use of AI in education
date: 2025-02-13T15:11:28Z 
draft: false
toc: true
categories: 
url: /resources/training-materials-for-teachers/05-legal-compliance/
authors:
- dietmar
disable_comments: true
summary: "Ensure you understand the legal requirements and ethical considerations when using AI in teaching, including data protection, copyright, and responsible use practices."
layout: page
aliases:
resources:
  - src: microsoft-365-hC_796Wu-VY-unsplash.jpg
    name: "header"
options:
  header: small
  headerHeight:
  unlisted: false
  showHeader: true
  hideSubscribeForm: false
  disable_sharebuttons: true
  hideShareButtons: true
  navbar: navbar navbar-expand-lg bg-white fixed-top font-weight-bold
  hide_date_reading_time: true
navigation:
  prev:
    title: "4. Designing Courses"
    url: "/resources/training-materials-for-teachers/04-designing-courses/"
  next:
    title: "6. AI Tools"
    url: "/resources/training-materials-for-teachers/06-ai-tools/"
---

<div class="row">
<div class="col-lg-10 mx-auto">

## 5.1 Committing students to compliance with legal regulations

Teachers are obliged to use AI in compliance with the following
regulations and inform students in courses about their mandatory nature
for all users of AI.

In all courses, teachers and students:

> 1\. commit to the data-protection-compliant use of AI and AI products
>
> 2\. are responsible, within the scope of teaching, learning, and
> research activities, for independently checking the legal restrictions
> of the data (input) used for data processing with AI before processing
> the data
>
> 3\. are particularly obliged to

- not use data as prompts which is subject to copyright

- not use prompts or parts of prompts owned by third parties

- not insert into AI applications sensitive and/or personal data or
    data that violate privacy

- protection rights which also include company-related data such as
    emails by companies or individuals, in-company drafts, etc.

- not use AI applications for discriminatory, offensive, or illegal
    purposes

> 4\. use only data that does not infringe upon the rights of others
> when using AI applications for teaching, learning, and research
> activities

## 5.2 Putting responsible and ethical use to practice

Many universities have created institutional statements on the ethical
and responsible use of AI. Since developing compliance skills takes
time, and learning is an ongoing process, teachers are recommended to
explain such regulations in every course, even at the risk of being
repetitive.

Regardless of institutional policies, the following topics should be
discussed with students where appropriate (cf. Shalevska 2024, European
Commission 2022):

- **Transparency and oversight:** As many generative AI are developed and
    owned by corporations, it may be important to think about how the
    tools are trained or what safeguards are in place to protect users
    from inaccurate information or harmful interactions.

- **Privacy, data governance, and safety:** These aspects concern two
    levels of teaching action.

    - The first addresses the need to evaluate the policies of AI
        providers and the features of their tools: How is user data or
        copyrighted material used, stored, or shared? Who has access to
        user data? Which personal data (e.g. submitted when signing in
        as a user) is used for training data or for other purposes?

    - The second addresses AI users employing data: Which data am I
        allowed to use, e.g. as a part of a prompt? Which legal
        provisions and ethical considerations must be observed?

- **Diversity, non-discrimination, and fairness:** AI systems may show
    algorithmic biases that perpetuate or exacerbate social
    inequalities. Do AI tools demonstrate unfair bias in their outputs?
    Are diverse groups characterized and represented in a
    non-discriminatory way in AI outputs? Are AI tools universally
    accessible? Are there discriminatory biases in algorithms?

- **Societal and political impact:** What safeguards are in place to
    prevent AI from being used to spread inaccurate or discriminatory
    content? What is the impact on specific social groups if we follow
    the suggestions or decisions generated by the AI directly? How does
    AI affect the work, autonomy, and societal participation of
    different social groups? Is AI used to violate political rights by
    distorting information or influencing it in favor of a particular
    view?

- **Environmental impact:** Training of AI tools with large data sets
    requires more and more energy consumption. What is the environmental
    impact of this energy use?

</div>
</div>